- Start Date: (fill me in with today's date, YYYY-MM-DD)
- RFC PR: (leave this empty)
- Rust Issue: (leave this empty)


# Summary

Change the address-of operator (`&`) to a borrow operator. This is an
alternative to #241 and #226 (cross-borrowing coercions). The borrow operator
would create a borrowed reference to data referenced by any number of smart
pointers or borrowed references. It would be implemented by performing as many
dereferences as possible and then take the address of the result.

E.g.,

```
fn foo(x: &Baz) { ... }

fn bar(y: Rc<Baz>, z: &Rc<&Baz>) {
    foo(&y);  // currently: foo(&*y);
    foo(&z);  // currently: foo(&***y);
}
```


# Motivation

In Rust the concept of ownership is more important than the precise level of
indirection. Whilst it is important to distinguish between values and references
for performance reasons, Rust's ownership model means it is less important to
know how many levels of indirection are involved in a reference.

It is annoying to have to write out `&*`, `&**`, etc. to convert from one
pointer kind to another. It is not really informative and just makes reading and
writing Rust more painful ("type Tetris").

It would be nice to strongly enforce the principle that the first type a
programmer should think of for a function signature is `&T` and to discourage
use of types like `&Box<T>` or `Box<T>`, since these are less general. However,
that generality is somewhat lost if the user of such functions has to consider
how to convert to `&T`.


# Detailed design

Writing `&expr` has the effect of dereferencing `expr` as many times as possible
(whether smart pointers or borrowed references) and taking the address of the
result. This is implemented in the same way as the `*` operator, by checking for
borrowed references (or `Gc` or `Box` pointers while these are special-cased by
the compiler) or the `Deref` trait.

Where `T` is some type that does not implement `Deref`, `&x` will have type `&T`
if `x` has type `T`, `&T`, `Box<T>`, `Rc<T>`, `&Rc<T>`, `Box<&Rc<Box<&T>`, and
so forth.

Note that this operation depends entirely on the static type of the expression
being borrowed. An expression with generic type and which is not bounded by
`Deref` will not be dereferenced, even if at runtime it is a smart pointer.

`&mut expr` would behave the same way but take a mutable reference as the final
step. The expression would have type `&mut T`. The usual rules for dereferencing
and taking a mutable reference would apply, so the programmer cannot subvert
Rust's mutability invariants.

No coercions may be applied to `expr` in `&expr`, but they may be applied to
`&expr` if it would otherwise be possible.

Raw pointers would not be dereferenced by `&`. We expect raw pointer
dereferences to be explicit and to be in an unsafe block. So if `x` has type
`&Box<*Rc<T>>`, then `&x` would have type `&*Rc<T>`. Alternatively, we could
make attempting to dereference a raw pointer using `&` a type error, so `&x`
would give a type error and a note advising to use explicit dereferencing.

We would add an `AddressOf` trait to the prelude that would fulfill the function
of the current `&` operator, i.e., take a borrowed reference without
dereferencing. It would be defined as:

```
trait AddressOf {
    fn address_of(&self) -> &Self;
    fn address_of_mut(&mut self) -> &mut Self;
}

impl<T> AddressOf for T {
    #[inline]
    fn address_of(&self) -> &T {
        self
    }
   
    #[inline]
    fn address_of_mut(&mut self) -> &mut T {
        self
    }
}
```

To get get the address of some value `foo`, you would write `foo.address_of()`.
This trait relies on the auto-ref behaviour of methods on their receivers and
the way that mechanism prefers to do as few references as possible.

I hope use of these functions are very rare. It is only necessary when you need
an expression to have type `&Rc<T>` or similar, and when that expression is not
the receiver of a method call.

There would be no change to reference types, `&T` would mean the same as it does
today.

There would also be no change to using `&` in pattern matching. That is, `&` in
pattern matching would match the behaviour of the `&` type, not the `&`
operator. This is logical since the `&` operator is no longer a type
construction operation. It is slightly unfortunate that the type introduction
and elimination syntax do not correspond exactly (but they would correspond
better than `*` does).

## ref

I think `ref` should continue to have the same behaviour it does today. It is a
bit of a shame that `&` and `ref` would have different effects, but given that
they are completely different syntax-wise, I think this is OK. In support of
keeping `ref` as is:

* if you want the borrow operator behaviour, you can always just use `&` on the
  variable;
* unlike in expression position, there is no way to call a function to get a
  reference (if we took the borrow operator behaviour);
* in my experience, when using `&` in expression position, I want to borrow the
  contents, but when using `ref` I want the operand, but I just want it 'by reference';
* pattern matching is very structural, and it just **feels** better that here we
  are precise about a reference and not unwrapping too;
* I think the above points hold especially true when considering `mut ref`, see
  also the comments below about mutable references to collections in the
  'unresolved questions' section.

# Drawbacks

Arguably, we should be very explicit about indirection in a systems language,
and this proposal blurs that distinctions somewhat.

When a function _does_ want to borrow an owning reference (e.g., takes a
`&Box<T>` or `&mut Vec<T>`), it would be more painful to call that function. I
believe this situation is rare, however.

Since the behaviour of the borrow operator depends on the static type of its
operand, the behaviour might change if a borrow expression is inlined from a
generic function. This is surprising when compared to the address-of operator,
however, it is similar behaviour to that expected from function/method calls and
the `*` operator (and other overloaded operators).

# Alternatives

Take this proposal, but use a different operator (`~` has been suggested). This
new operator would have the semantics proposed here for `&`, and `&` would
continue to be an address-of operator.

There are two RFCs for different flavours of cross-borrowing: #226 and #241.

#226 proposes sugaring `&*expr` as `expr` by doing a dereference and then an
address-of. This converts any pointer-like type to a borrowed reference.

#241 proposes sugaring `&*n expr` to `expr` where `*n` means any number of
dereferences. This converts any borrowed pointer-like type to a borrowed
reference, erasing multiple layers of indirection.

At a high level, #226 privileges the level of indirection, and #241 privileges
ownership. This RFC is closer to #241 in spirit, in that it erases multiple
layers of indirection and privileges ownership over indirection.

All three proposals mean less fiddling with `&` and `*` to get the type you want
and none of them erase the difference between a value and a reference (as auto-
borrowing would).

In many cases this proposal and #241 give similar results. The difference is
that this proposal is linked to an operator and is type independent, whereas
#241 is implicit and depends on the required type. An example which type checks
under #241, but not this proposal is:

```
fn foo(x: &Rc<T>) {
    let y: &T = x;
}
```

Under this proposal you would use `let y = &x;`.

I believe the advantages of this approach vs an implicit coercion are:

* better integration with type inference (note no explicit type in the above
  example);
* more easily predictable and explainable behaviour (because we always do
  as many dereferences as possible, c.f. a coercion which does _some_ number of
  dereferences, dependent on the expected type);
* does not complicate the coercion system, which is already fairly complex and
  obscure (RFC on this coming up soon, btw).

The principle advantage of the coercion approach is flexibility, in particular
in the case where we want to borrow a reference to a smart pointer, e.g.
(aturon),

```
fn wants_vec_ref(v: &mut Vec<u8>) { ... }

fn has_vec(v: Vec<u8>) {
    wants_vec_ref(&mut v); // coercing Vec to &mut Vec
}
```

Under this proposal `&mut v` would have type `&mut[u8]` so we would fail type
checking (I actually think this is desirable because it is more predictable,
although it is also a bit surprising). Instead you would write `&mut(v)`. (This
example assumes `Deref` for `Vec`, but the point stands without it, in general).


# Unresolved questions

## Receiver conversions

We currently allow very flexible type conversions in method calls and fields
accesses (i.e., using the dot operator). These are fairly unpredictable and a
little out of place in Rust since they auto-reference (blurring the line between
value and reference). It strikes me that the most common case is for converting
to `&self`, it might be possible to change the current receiver conversion to be
an implicit version of the borrow operator. I believe that would be more
predictable, more consistent, and easier to explain. However, it is clearly
less flexible, so the question is 'how much code would break?'.


## Slicing

There is a separate question about how to handle the `Vec<T>` -> `&[T]` and
`String` -> `&str` conversions. We currently support this conversion by calling
the `as_slice` method or using the empty slicing syntax (`expr[]`). If we want,
we could implement `Deref<[T]>` for `Vec<T>` and `Deref<str>` for `String`,
which would allow us to convert using `&*expr`. With this RFC, we could convert
using `&expr` (with RFC #226 the conversion would be implicit).

The question is really about `Vec`, `String`, and `Deref`, and is mostly
orthogonal to this RFC. As long as we accept this or one of the cross-borrowing
RFCs, then `Deref` could give us 'nice' conversions from `Vec` and `String`.

However, it is worth considering the `&mut` situation in particular. One place
it seems sensible to want a mutable reference is when mutating owning
collections. If we want to add or remove an element from a `Vec` (for example)
we do want a mutable reference to the `Vec` itself and not a mutable slice view
of the data inside. Even though this situation is sensible, I believe it is rare
enough that using a function will suffice. I believe many such instances are in
pattern matching, and `ref` is not affected by this proposal.
